---
layout: post
title: A Free Speech Infringment Against Tallan Lanz
published: true
---
<p>Gold, or more correctly phrased commodity based money, is one of the fundamental pillars that protects society and protects you, the individual.  Many decades ago in <a href="https://www.amazon.com/dp/0913966703?tag=run07-20&amp;camp=0&amp;creative=0&amp;linkCode=as4&amp;creativeASIN=0913966703&amp;adid=1WVK6N6PS2HTEJ0Z52CF&amp;" target="_blank">The Theory of Money and Credit</a> the brilliant <a href="http://mises.org/story/2276" target="_blank">Ludwig von Mises’s</a> stated that “It is impossible to grasp the meaning of the idea of sound money if one does not realize that it was <strong>devised as an instrument for the protection of civil liberties against </strong><span class="hilite"><strong>despotic</strong></span><strong> </strong><span class="hilite"><strong>inroads</strong></span><strong> on the part of governments. Ideologically it belongs in the same class with political constitutions and bills of rights</strong>.”</p>
<p><span><strong><span style="font-weight: normal;">In 1966 <a href="http://www.runtogold.com/2008/11/gold-and-economic-freedom-by-alan-greenspan/" target="_blank">Alan Greenspan</a> wrote, "In the absence of the gold standard, there is no way to protect savings from confiscation through inflation.</span></strong> There is no safe store of value. If there were, the government would have to make its holding illegal, as was done in the case of gold. If everyone decided, for example, to convert all his bank deposits to silver or copper or any other good, and thereafter declined to accept checks as payment for goods, bank deposits would lose their purchasing power and government-created bank credit would be worthless as a claim on goods. <strong><span style="font-weight: normal;">The financial policy of the welfare state requires that there be no way for the owners of wealth to protect themselves.</span></strong></span></p>
<p>This is the shabby secret of the welfare statists’ tirades against gold. Deficit spending is simply a scheme for the confiscation of wealth. <strong><span style="font-weight: normal;">Gold stands in the way of this insidious process. </span></strong><strong>It stands as a protector of property rights</strong>. If one grasps this, one has no difficulty in understanding the statists’ antagonism toward the gold standard."</p>
<p>Recently, a gross violation of civil liberties has been committed by yet another despotic government.  The Philosophy of Liberty explains the principle of self-ownership and the Non-Aggression Axiom.  The Non-Aggression Axiom requires not using fraud, force or the threat of force against an innocent.</p>
<p><object width="480" height="385" data="http://www.youtube.com/v/muHg86Mys7I&amp;hl=en&amp;fs=1" type="application/x-shockwave-flash"><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true" /><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always" /><param name="src" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/muHg86Mys7I&amp;hl=en&amp;fs=1" /><param name="allowfullscreen" value="true" /></object></p>
<p>(<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=muHg86Mys7I" target="_blank">Click here</a> for the video)</p>
<p> </p>
<p>The First Amendment provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances."  While I do not agree philosophically or jurisprudentially, the United States Supreme Court has used the Incorporation Doctrine to apply to the States the unalienable enumerated 1st Amendment rights to freedom of speech, freedom of the press and the free exercise of religion.</p>
<p>To abridge means to shorten without losing the sense or to curtail.  Curtail means to reduce extent or quantity or to impose a restriction on or to deprive someone of something.  Many immoral and tyrannical costumed government bureaucrats have passed illegal and immoral laws which infringe on individuals unalienable right to freedom of speech.</p>
<p>Like most States Wisconsin is a a classic case.  For example, under <a href="http://www.legis.state.wi.us/statutes/Stat0097.pdf" target="_blank">Food Regulation Chapter 97.18(4)</a> "The serving of colored oleomargarine or margarine at a public eating place as a substitute for table butter is prohibited unless it is ordered by the customer."  I suppose margarine and butter are to be separate but equal?</p>
<p>Even assuming that the passage of such a law does tend to protect the public safety and welfare the bottom line is that such a regulation is a tyrannical approach to a socio-medical problem.  Such approaches have never worked and never will.  This is a classic example of a tyrannical attempt to regulate the supply side instead of focusing on voluntary demand side persuasion which could actually solve the problem.</p>
<p>Another example is that under Section 9.08.090 of the Municipal Code in Brookfield, WI "No person shall conduct any establishment where tattooing is practiced nor engage in the practice of tattooing; provided, however, that tattooing may be performed for medical purposes by a person licensed to practice medicine or osteopathy in the state.  The word "tattooing" as used herein means the marking of the skin of a person by insertion of permanent colors through puncture of the skin."  Tattoos and other markings have existed in religion, society and culture for thousands of years.</p>
<p>With Tongans or Samoans such markings often are religious in nature.  Such an egregious violation of an individual's freedom of speech and free exercise of religion shows the <strong>immorality</strong> of of the tyrannical costumed government bureaucrats violating the non-aggression axiom.  Fortunately, on December 18, 2001 Alderman Jakus moved adoption of the <a href="http://www.scottberg.com/pdf/cc_2001_12_18.pdf" target="_blank">Ordinance No. 1848</a> repealing this section which motion was seconded by Alderman Waffenschmidt and the vote was taken and carried unanimously.</p>
<p><object width="480" height="385" data="http://www.youtube.com/v/yfjTrrBE_eI&amp;hl=en&amp;fs=1" type="application/x-shockwave-flash"><param name="allowFullScreen" value="true" /><param name="allowscriptaccess" value="always" /><param name="src" value="http://www.youtube.com/v/yfjTrrBE_eI&amp;hl=en&amp;fs=1" /><param name="allowfullscreen" value="true" /></object><br />
(<a href="http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yfjTrrBE_eI" target="_blank">Click here</a> for the news report video)<br />
Lately the tyrannical costumed bureaucrat Robert Anderson is on a great crusade to prevent innocent Tallan Lanz, an 8 year old guitar prodigy, from exercising his passion by expressing himself freely through his music and guitar talent.  Tallan Lanz is in no way using fraud, force or the threat of force against anyone but only wants to freely express himself on private property.  It is the petty tyrant Robert Anderson who is immorally threating force against the innocent Tallan Lanz.  If Tallan does not yield to his intimidation then Mr. Anderson has threatened to exacerbate the situation with physical violence exercised by some immoral costumed officer.</p>
<p>Like most tyrannical costumed bureaucrats it appears that Mr. Anderson is willing to aggressively murder the innocent Tallan Lanz for the 'crime' of playing his guitar.  Instead of honoring his oath to uphold the Constitution, working like Alderman Jakus to repeal the code and refusing to enforce this immoral and unethical law the cowardly petty tyrant Mr. Anderson is threatening the use of force against an innocent.  Therefore, Mr. Anderson is violating the Non-Aggression Axiom and is unethical and immoral.</p>
<p>Sound money would help protect against this type of despotic inroad against freedom of speech and expression.  If power over the purse were retained by the people then they would most likely not fund such activities like policing when margarine or butter can be served, who can play what music when or where and who can alter their skin for whatever purpose because doing so would not be a prudent use of their hard earned wealth.  The free market would most likely not find these activities worth expending valuable resources to prevent and would instead concentrate on property and liberty infringements.</p>
<p><strong>But instead the costumed tyrants use illegal and unconstitutional laws to steal hard earned wealth via confiscation through inflation without representation or due process of law.</strong>  Then they waste this stolen wealth by violently crusading against harmless and innocent activities where there has been no violation of the non-aggression axiom.  This is only one example.</p>
<p>How was your traveling this holiday season?  If you took a plane then it appears you got orange while the thieves got green.  Do you enjoy being robbed to fund your own wanding?  A type of civil disobedience is using an alternative monetary system like gold or silver coins or <a href="http://www.runtogold.com/goldmoney">GoldMoney</a>.  Strike at the root instead of hacking at the wands.</p>
<p>Mr. Anderson contacted at Bob.Anderson@dwd.state.wi.us or called at 608-266-3345.  It would do well to let him know his actions are despicable, unethical and immoral.</p>
